# disaster-declaration-analysis-capstone
Repository for Capstone Research Project in MIS581 @ CSU-Global; Disaster Declaration Data Analysis; Drew Saunders

In this Capstone Research Project, the topic being discussed and analyzed is the analysis of FEMA-declared disasters data.

Natural disasters can be severe, costly, and deadly. FEMA, the EPA, and other agencies work tirelessly to educate, prepare, provide aid, and lead recovery efforts for individuals that are likely to be impacted or have recently been impacted by disasters. The objective of this project is to advance the knowledge of declared disaster events in the US, specifically in their frequency and predictability. By finding significant patterns in the data, humanitarian organizations can improve upon previous procedures and infrastructure to better prepare themselves and others for future disasters. This research project reviews a FEMA dataset on declared disasters from 1953-2024 in the United States, focusing on the correlation and predictive modeling of the specific variables of incidentType (type of disaster), placeCode (zip code), and incidentBeginDate (date of disaster occurrence). Also, multiple studies around the topic of disasters were reviewed for research context, including studies on subtopics in general research project management, social media usage in disasters, and artificial intelligence and machine learning with disaster data. SAS Studio and Jupyter Notebook were used to view and analyze the data using correlation analysis and predictive regression modeling. The results of testing showed that Severe Storms show to be the most frequently occurring disaster type, and that the combination of disaster type, location, and date are not correlated at a statistically significant level of p<0.05. The implications of these findings are that additional factors must be considered to appropriately predict disasters at specific dates and locations. Humanitarian organizations must continue to learn and grow in this field to continually reduce the impacts of disasters in dollars and in lives.

Keywords: disaster, predictive modeling, FEMA, declared disasters
